CASE: EDWARD W. BEVERLY v. COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA
No. 0852-98-2
DATE: JUNE 29, 1999
----------
COURT OF APPEALS OF VIRGINIA


EDWARD W. BEVERLY 
v. 
COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA

Present:  Judges Coleman, Elder and Bumgardner
Argued at Richmond, Virginia



                        MEMORANDUM OPINION* BY JUDGE LARRY G. ELDER




        FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF ORANGE COUNTY
Lloyd C. Sullenberger, Judge

                Roy D. Bradley (Bradley Law Firm, P.C., on 
briefs), for appellant.

                Eugene Murphy, Assistant Attorney General 
(Mark L. Earley, Attorney General, on brief), 
for appellee.



        Edward Wayne Beverly (appellant) appeals from his jury 
trial convictions for abduction with intent to defile, forcible 
sodomy and first-degree murder.  On appeal, he contends the 
trial court erroneously (1) admitted DNA evidence in violation 
of Code  19.2-270.5; (2) excluded blood typing evidence; 
(3) refused to appoint a handwriting expert and a fingerprint 
expert to aid appellant's defense; and (4) admitted without 
proper foundation Commonwealth's exhibits 2 through 9--a road 
atlas and other documents allegedly found by a witness who had 
died prior to trial.  For the reasons that follow, we hold that 
the trial court committed no reversible error, and we affirm 
appellant's convictions.
1.  ADMISSIBILITY OF DNA EVIDENCE UNDER CODE  19.2-270.5
        Appellant objects to the admission of the DNA tests for 
which notice was filed on February 13, 1998 (the second DNA 
notice), on the ground that no probability report accompanied 
the December 1, 1997 certificate of analysis as required by Code 
 19.2-270.5.   He objects to admission of the DNA test for which 
notice was filed on February 17, 1998 (the third DNA notice), on 
the ground that the notice was filed less than twenty-one days 
prior to trial and that no probability report accompanied the 
certificate of analysis.  We reject both contentions.
        The second DNA notice states specifically that "the 
Commonwealth has attached the following written profiles, 
reports, or statements concerning [the DNA evidence sought to be 
admitted] to the copy of this notice sent to counsel for 

[appellant]: . . . Division of Forensic Science Certificate of 
Analysis dated December 1, 1997, F.S. Lab No N89-09248."  The 
complete December 1, 1997 certificate of analysis, including 
page 4's probability analysis, was provided to appellant on 
February 6, 1998, as part of the Commonwealth's supplemental 
answer to appellant's discovery.  Code  19.2-270.5 does not 
require that copies of the profiles, statements or reports to be 
introduced must be attached to the notice; it requires only that 
they be "provide[d] or [made] available."  Because it is 
undisputed that the Commonwealth made available the probability 
calculations contained in the December 1, 1997 certificate of 
analysis in a timely fashion, the requirements of the statute 
were met, and the trial court did not err in admitting the 
certificate into evidence.
        The court also did not err in admitting into evidence the 
certificate named in the third DNA notice.  That notice listed 
only the FBI report dated July 22, 1993, a two-page report which 
the Commonwealth previously timely had provided as an attachment 
to both its first and second DNA notices.  Because the report 
had already been timely filed under Code  19.2-270.5, the 
Commonwealth was not required to file it again.  Therefore, the 
Commonwealth's filing of the third DNA notice less than 
twenty-one days before trial was irrelevant to the report's 
admissibility.
        We also reject appellant's argument that the July 22, 1993 
report was inadmissible because it was not accompanied by a 
statistical probability analysis.  That report was a two-page 
analysis excluding Thomas Kidd as a potential contributor to the 
DNA detected in the sperm fraction of the anal swabs taken from 
the victim.  Where a suspect is excluded as a contributor, the 
likelihood that a particular suspect was the contributor of the 
sample found is zero, and no probability calculation is 
necessary.  See National Research Council, The Evaluation of 
Forensic DNA Evidence 51 (1996).
        For these reasons, we hold that the trial court did not 
abuse its discretion in admitting the challenged DNA evidence.
2.  EXCLUSION OF BLOOD TYPING EVIDENCE
        Appellant contends that blood typing results produced by 
Nancy Avery indicating his blood is Type A when, in reality, 
appellant's blood is Type O, show that the blood was tampered 
with or inadvertently switched.  He argues that the trial court 
abused its discretion in excluding this exculpatory evidence 
while simultaneously admitting DNA evidence resulting from tests 
performed on the same blood sample.  Again, we disagree.
        We hold first that appellant may not object on appeal to 
the admission of the DNA evidence due to alleged tampering with 
the sample.  Appellant moved to suppress the DNA evidence on 
this ground prior to trial, but during argument on that motion, 
appellant withdrew his motion to suppress.  Therefore, appellant 
did not preserve this issue for appeal, see Rule 5A:18, and we 
consider only whether the court erroneously excluded the results 
of Avery's blood typing test indicating that the blood tested 
was Type A.
        Second, we hold that the expert testimony regarding the 
reliability of Avery's typing test on the dried blood removed 
from the stoppers was conflicting at best and justified 
exclusion of the blood type evidence.  See Spencer v. 
Commonwealth, 240 Va. 78, 97-98, 393 S.E.2d 609, 621 (1990) 
(holding that when scientific evidence is offered, "the court 
must make a threshold finding of fact with respect to the 
reliability of the scientific method offered" and that "[if 
there is a conflict [in the evidence regarding reliability], and 
the trial court's finding is supported by credible evidence, it 
will not be disturbed on appeal").  Avery herself testified that 
she had virtually no experience testing dried samples; she told 
the officers who brought her the sample that she did not know 
what test was appropriate for a dried sample and that she would 
perform the only test she knew.  Deann Dabbs, who qualified as 
an expert in forensic serology and had tested thousands of dried 
blood samples during her career, testified that the method used 
by Avery was unapproved and unreliable for testing dried 
samples.  Finally, when Avery used this method to test other 
dried samples of known type, her results were correct only 
fifty-eight percent of the time.  Dabbs' testimony and Avery's 
test results provide credible evidence supporting the trial 
court's finding that the method Avery used "to type the blood 
taken from the . . . test tube stoppers was unreliable and not 
scientifically accepted."  Therefore, we hold that the trial 
court did not abuse its discretion in refusing to admit the 
evidence.
3.  REFUSAL TO APPOINT FINGERPRINT AND HANDWRITING EXPERTS
        The Commonwealth, upon request, is required to "provide 
indigent defendants with `the basic tools of an adequate 
defense,' and . . . in certain circumstances, these basic tools 
may include the appointment of non-psychiatric experts."  Husske 
v. Commonwealth, 252 Va. 203, 211, 476 S.E.2d 920, 925 (1996) 
(citation omitted), cert. denied, 519 U.S. 1154, 117 S. Ct. 
1092, 137 L. Ed. 2d 225 (1997).  "[A]n indigent defendant 
seeking the appointment of an expert has the burden of showing a 
particularized need therefor."  Barnabei v. Commonwealth, 252 
Va. 161, 171, 477 S.E.2d 270, 276 (1996), cert. denied, 520 U.S. 
1224, 117 S. Ct. 1724, 137 L. Ed. 2d 845 (1997).  A defendant 
may not prevail in his pursuit of an expert merely because the 
science involved is advanced or complicated, see Husske, 252 Va. 
at 213, 476 S.E.2d at 926, or because he has a mere "hope or 
suspicion that favorable evidence may be procured," see 
Barnabei, 252 Va. at 171, 477 S.E.2d at 276.
        We hold that the trial court did not abuse its discretion 
in denying appellant's motion for appointment of a fingerprint 
expert and a handwriting expert.  See Downing v. Commonwealth, 
26 Va. App. 717, 723, 496 S.E.2d 164, 167 (1998).  The argument 
advanced by appellant prior to trial indicated, at best, that 
the Commonwealth intended to offer both fingerprint and 
handwriting evidence.  The evidence introduced at trial linked 
appellant to exhibits 6, the note proposing sex, and 10, the 
list of ways to disguise oneself, by handwriting, and exhibit 7, 
another note, by fingerprints.  However, exhibits 6 and 10 were 
identified by Timothy Trent as having been in appellant's car; 
appellant admitted that exhibit 10 was his; and exhibit 7 was 
found with exhibit 6, which, as set out above, had been linked 
to appellant by Timothy Trent.  We hold, therefore, that the 
trial court did not abuse its discretion in holding that 
appellant failed to demonstrate a particularized need for either 
expert.
4.  FOUNDATION FOR ADMISSION OF ATLAS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS
        Appellant contends that the trial court erroneously 
admitted the atlas and other items Thomas Kidd gave to Deputy 
Dickson.  He asserts that, without Kidd's testimony, the 
Commonwealth provided an insufficient foundation for admission 
of the items.  In addition, he contends that Kidd's conduct in 
giving the items to Deputy Dickson was a non-verbal assertion 
constituting hearsay and should have been excluded.
        We note first that appellant did not object to Deputy 
Dickson's testimony at trial that Thomas Kidd gave him the atlas 
and other items.  Further, in his pretrial motion, appellant 
objected only to the admission of Kidd's statements to Dickson, 
not to any testimony about Kidd's conduct.  Therefore, Rule 
5A:18 bars our consideration of this issue on appeal.  We also 
find no reason to invoke the good cause or ends of justice 
exceptions to the rule.  In addition, appellant's assignment of 
error on appeal asks only whether the trial court abused its 
discretion in denying the motion to exclude the atlas and other 
documents.  Because appellant did not raise the issue of the 
admissibility of Kidd's conduct in his pretrial motion, no 
appeal was granted on this issue.  Therefore, Rule 5A:12(c) also 
bars our consideration of this issue on appeal.
        "The admissibility of evidence is within the broad 
discretion of the trial court, and a ruling will not be 
disturbed on appeal in the absence of an abuse of discretion."  
Blain v. Commonwealth, 7 Va. App. 10, 16, 371 S.E.2d 838, 842 
(1988).  To establish the necessary foundation for the admission 
of real evidence, the party offering it must show that it is 
both relevant and authentic.  See 1 Charles E. Friend, The Law 
of Evidence in Virginia 13-5, at 546 (4th ed. 1993).
        Regarding relevancy, "`[a]ny fact, however remote, that 
tends to establish the probability or improbability of a fact in 
issue is admissible.'"  Wynn v. Commonwealth, 5 Va. App. 283, 
291, 362 S.E.2d 193, 198 (1987) (citation omitted).  
Authenticity of "a tangible, solid object [for which] no 
chemical analysis is involved" may be established through 
circumstantial evidence "that the item is what it purports to be 
. . . and that its condition has not changed materially since 
its initial discovery."  Friend, supra, at 546; see Wileman v. 
Commonwealth, 24 Va. App. 642, 648, 484 S.E.2d 621, 624 (1997).  
"`The court must determine if the circumstantial evidence is 
sufficient to justify the document's admission; the jury will 
then, as in all cases, make an independent decision as to 
whether the document is genuine.'"  Duncan v. Commonwealth, 2 
Va. App. 717, 726-27, 347 S.E.2d 539, 544 (1993) (citation 
omitted).
        The evidence in the record is sufficient to establish both 
the relevance and the authenticity of Commonwealth's Exhibits 2 
through 9, despite the inability of Thomas Kidd to testify at 
trial about where he obtained the items.  The evidence 
established that, on the morning of April 13, 1989, Joann and 
Thomas Kidd were concerned about the victim.  Thomas Kidd went 
to the victim's house, phoned Joann Kidd sounding "concerned," 
and immediately returned home "upset."  After calling several 
relatives to try to locate the victim, Joann and Thomas Kidd 
reported the victim missing and gave to Officer Daniel Dickson 
the atlas, Commonwealth's exhibit 2, with several other items, 
Commonwealth's exhibits 3 through 9, tucked inside it.  Joann 
Kidd and the victim's husband testified that they had never seen 
the atlas or any of the other items prior to April 13, 1989, and 
that, to their knowledge, neither they nor Thomas Kidd nor the 
victim had any connection to the Knight's Inn or the Post Oak 
Market and none had purchased the lottery tickets.  
        Deputy Dickson testified that within hours of receiving the 
atlas and other items from Thomas Kidd, he found at the victim's 
nearby residence (1) a map page, Commonwealth's exhibit 12, 
which had been torn out of the atlas he received from Thomas 
Kidd, and (2) a list, Commonwealth's exhibit 10.  This 
circumstantial evidence supported a finding that Thomas Kidd 
found the atlas and other items, Commonwealth's exhibits 2 
through 9, at the victim's residence and turned them over to 
Deputy Dickson, thereby establishing their authenticity.
        Other evidence--including appellant's statements to police, 
the testimony of Timothy Trent and the owner of the Post Oak 
Market, and the fingerprint and handwriting evidence--supported 
a finding that the atlas and other items belonged to appellant.  
The challenged exhibits were relevant in that they tended to 
prove that appellant was both in Orange County and on the 
victim's property about the time she disappeared.  Because the 
circumstantial evidence supported a finding that Commonwealth's 
exhibits 2 through 9 were both relevant and authentic, the trial 
court did not abuse its discretion in admitting them into 
evidence.
        For these reasons, we hold that the trial court did not err 
in admitting the contested DNA evidence, excluding the 
challenged blood typing evidence, refusing to appoint a 
fingerprint or handwriting expert, and admitting the atlas and 
other items Thomas Kidd gave to Deputy Dickson.  Therefore, we 
affirm appellant's convictions.
                                                                                Affirmed.
* Pursuant to Code  17.1-413, recodifying Code 
 17-116.010, this opinion is not designated for publication. 
  On brief, appellant objected to the absence of a "profile" 
rather than a "probability report."  However, his description of 
what he sought makes clear his objection was to the absence of 
evidence of the random-match probability, which we refer to 
herein as a probability calculation or probability report.  See 
National Research Council, The Evaluation of Forensic DNA 
Evidence 2, 12-14, 25, 29-31, 217 (1996); see also Code 
 19.2-310.2 (in statute requiring certain convicted felons to 
provide samples for DNA analysis, referring to "[DNA] analysis 
to determine identification characteristics specific to the 
person" as "the profile").  A probability calculation or 
probability report indicating the "statistical probability of a 
DNA match" constitutes a profile, report or statement within the 
meaning of Code  19.2-270.5.  See Caprio v. Commonwealth, 254 
Va. 507, 512, 493 S.E.2d 371, 373-74 (1997).
 

%%%
 

